I'm sure you've heard this term before, entropy, or I'm sure you've seen this word written down.
The concept of entropy has different meanings, different interpretations in different areas of science.
So, for example, in physics, the term entropy comes from or is related to the second law of thermodynamics.
And it's basically the idea that stuff in the universe matter in the universe naturally goes from a
state of order to a state of disorder, and this means that we will all die in the universe, will decay
into nothingness.
Well, it's a rather grim, depressing thought, but unfortunately that is simply the truth.
Now we are actually in deep learning.
We're not concerned with this interpretation of entropy.
Instead, we are going to be using a different kind of entropy, which is named after this gentleman
here, Claude Shannon.
He was a real genius and made a lot of important contributions to signal processing and computer science
and cryptography.
And Shannon entropy is a measure.
It's a quantity that describes the amount of surprise or uncertainty that we have about a specific variable.
And in particular, entropy is maximal at probabilities of 0.5.
So this is when things when events are maximally uncertain or unpredictable.
And as the events get more predictable, either that you know we are the probability goes down to zero.
So this event never happens or the probability goes up to one that this event always happens, then
that decreases the amount of entropy.
So this is called information theoretic entropy or it's also called Shannon entropy.
And it means that yeah everything is great and happy.
And we're going to have great wonderful lives and that That's surprising.
Things convey more information now.
I also want to briefly discuss this term surprise, because the word surprise also has different meanings
in different areas of language, different contexts.
In the context of information theory, surprise means the amount of predictability or uncertainty.
So we might think that, you know, if you flip a coin and it lands on heads 99 times, then you flip
it 100th time and it lands on tails, that might be pretty surprising.
But in terms of entropy, that's actually not a lot of surprise in the system altogether.
That one event might be surprising to us humans, but the system of 99 heads and one tail actually has
very little surprise the system altogether, because the probability of tails is very small.
Actually.
Now I forget if I was saying 99 heads or 99 tails, but I think you get the idea.
So the idea is that entropy is maximal when probabilities are chance level and entropies are minimal
as probabilities go to zero or to one, indicating that we have a lot of certainty, a lot of predictability
about the particular event.
Here is the formula for entropy.
So we have three terms in this formula X which is the data values p which is the probability of those
values occurring.
And then we have the log.
So we multiply the probability that an event occurs by the log of that same probability.
So this term here is exactly the same as this term.
We multiply the probability by the log of that probability for all of the different possible events.
So for a coin flip this would be n would be two right.
Because for a coin flip there are two possible outcomes heads and tails.
So the probability of heads times the log of the probability of heads plus the the probability of tails
times the log of the probability of tails, we sum those values together.
If we take the minus sign and entropy is typically indicated using the capital letter H, the minus
sign here is because probability values go between 0 and 1, and the log of A, a number between 0 and
1 is negative.
You saw this in the previous video.
So this whole quantity actually ends up being negative.
So we just flip it to be positive just facilitates the interpretation.
So this is the formula for entropy.
You are going to see this implemented in Python in a few moments.
Now I just want to briefly discuss interpreting entropy.
So a system a collection with high entropy means that the data set has a lot of variability.
Likewise, or conversely, low entropy means that most of the values in the data set repeat and are
therefore redundant.
So there's less surprise, There's more predictability of the system.
Now, I don't want to get too deep into a discussion of entropy versus variance.
It's a little you know, the exact relationship between these two is a bit outside the context of this
course.
But just to mention this briefly, because these are two different measures of variability.
Entropy is nonlinear and makes no assumptions about the distributions, whereas variance is more appropriate
for a distribution that is roughly normally distributed.
So here we use the log base two.
In the previous video, I mentioned that the logarithm has several different bases and they give slightly
different slopes.
They look slightly different in the log space.
So in in entropy, when computing entropy you can actually use various different kinds of logs.
Log base two.
The units are called bits.
If it's the natural log, the units are called nats.
But otherwise the concept is the same and the interpretation is the same.
So that is for entropy.
Here you see that formula again.
It's just shortened a little bit.
So instead of the probability of a particular value of x here I'm just writing p.
So this formula here is for describing one probability distribution.
So p p p.
But we're also going to be computing something called cross entropy.
And that is the entropy between two different probability distributions.
So p times log of q.
Instead of having the p in here we have q.
So p is one probability distribution and q is a different probability distribution.
Now in deep learning the way that we use cross entropy is to characterize the performance of the model.
So we have P is going to be the probability that the picture is a cat.
So we have pictures of cats and pictures of not cats.
So probability p is going to be the probability that this picture is a cat.
And q will be the probability that the model output.
So the model is going to say I think that this is a picture of a cat with a probability of 0.5.
Right.
So that's you know, the model is just guessing if q equals 0.5 versus after training, we say, well,
you know, the picture is still a cat.
So probability of this being a cat.
And then the model after training the model is going to learn to distinguish cats from not cats.
So this value of Q is going to be something really large.
Let's say 0.99.
Now a picture is either a cat or not a cat.
So in fact, in deep learning, events generally happen or they don't happen.
So that means that the events in deep learning, when we are going to be computing cross entropy, these
events are generally with probability 0 or 1.
So this either is a cat or it isn't a cat.
Of course the model output is a probability somewhere between 0 Zero and one.
So this picture definitely is a cat.
So this value will be one.
And the model will predict that this is a cat with a probability of let's say 0.99.
And you know from two videos ago that these probability values from the model, the model output are
computed through the softmax function.
All right.
So let's switch to Python.
I will show you how to compute the entropy and cross entropy in numpy and also in PyTorch.
So we import numpy.
I'm going to import PyTorch a little bit later.
This is just a formula again to remind us the uh formula for entropy.
Okay so here I have a bunch of empty cells.
Please don't scroll down yet, because I would like us to critically determine the problem with this
formula here.
Okay.
So here I have the probability of an event happening.
So we say 0.25.
So this event has a 25% chance of happening.
Now when you look at this formula, this looks correct, right?
This is p times log p.
And that's what I have written here minus p times log p.
So why is this the wrong formula.
What is wrong with this formula?
If you would like to pause the video and see if you can figure it out without scrolling down, without
cheating and looking down, then please feel free to do so.
So the problem here is that we are only computing the p times log p for one event.
This is just the probability of the event happening, but there's also the probability of the event
not happening, and the probability of the event not happening is one minus p.
So the the let's call this q is equal to one minus p.
So the probability if the probability is 25% then the probability of it not happening is 75%.
So then we would need to sum over all of the values of x, not only the one value of x.
Okay.
So that's what we see here.
So here we see the probability of this event occurring is 0.25.
The probability of it not occurring is 0.75.
And then we have to sum up all of those values.
And the way I'm doing that is with this for loop.
So I initialize h or entropy to be zero.
And I say h equals itself.
Now we could write you know it might be more sensible to do it like this which is also fine.
So you could say h equals itself plus minus p times log p.
And then I'm just moving the minus sign over here.
Okay.
So then this is the true entropy for an event with a probability of 0.25.
Now this is in a for loop.
This would be convenient for you know if we had multiple probabilities here.
This is also correct.
This is just explicitly written out for n equals two events.
So we have a binary event.
This is like the cat example.
This picture is a cat or it isn't a cat.
So the probability of the picture being a cat is p.
Then that means that the probability that this picture is not a cat is one minus p.
Likewise, when the model reports that, you know, I think the model says I the model, I think that
the probability that this picture is a cat is 0.9.
That means that the probability of this picture not being a cat is one -0.9, which is 0.1.
Okay.
So then we can run this code that's going to give us exactly the same answer.
This is just written out explicitly.
Now, the reason why I take the time to write this out and explain this is you will see this is a form
that we are going to be using later on, called binary cross entropy.
It's actually a really important loss function in deep learning.
So I'll write it out.
So binary cross entropy.
And this is the formula for binary cross entropy.
This is one of the most important loss functions in deep learning.
In fact there's going to be an entire lecture later on just about this making sure that we understand
this.
And so in this video you see that it just comes from writing out the formula for entropy when there
are exactly two events.
All right.
Very good.
Now down to cross entropy.
The formula is basically the same.
We just need two sets of events.
So this is the probability of the cat.
It either you know the picture is a cat or isn't a cat.
And this is the model saying that it is a cat or isn't a cat.
And then you can see the formula is the same as above, but it's p times log q.
So then we write that out.
So here is the cross entropy between P and Q.
Now, this is obvious when you think about it, but I wanted to mention this explicitly that these the
two probability quantities here are not interchangeable.
So p times log q is different from q times log p.
So this was 1.38.
And when I reverse them I actually get a warning message because that we're dividing by zero.
The problem here is that we're trying to take the log of zero.
Let me actually change this to be something very small.
That's not exactly zero.
So here we see the cross entropy is ten between these.
So the point was just to show you that p times log p is different from q times log.
Sorry p times log q is different from q times log p.
And I'm confusing myself here.
Let's make sure this works again okay.
Yep.
That's the expected answer.
Okay.
And then here again I'm just writing this whole expression out instead of a for loop because I know
that we only have two possible events here.
Present or absent.
Is a cat or isn't a cat?
We can write out this for loop explicitly.
And this expression here is binary cross entropy.
And now we can actually simplify this further because the second value of p here is exactly zero.
So here we have the second value of p.
This is zero.
So that means this entire term goes to zero.
It doesn't matter what Q is over here.
Similarly this first value of p is one.
So we can even just drop this term.
So in fact when we have this special case where p is one and zero and there are only two events, then
binary cross entropy actually just simplifies to minus the log of q.
So this is just really simple algebraic simplification.
And it's going to become important later on when you learn about loss functions.
Okay, so far everything was done with numpy.
I want to briefly introduce you to implementing this in PyTorch.
So here we're using a submodule of PyTorch.
It is torch for neural networks dot functional which just gives us access to a bunch of functions.
Now this is rather long to type.
So it is typical to import torch and functional using the abbreviation F capital F.
This is a pretty typical way to code in PyTorch.
Now the first thing I want to show you there's several things I want to show you here.
First is the function is binary cross entropy.
So we are going to be computing the cross entropy between two probabilities.
That gives us the cross entropy.
And then it's binary because there's only two possible options present or absent.
Now the first thing I want to show you is that the PyTorch binary cross entropy function does not play
well with numpy.
So when we try to run this code, we get an error message.
And the error is that it's basically having to do with lists.
I said it doesn't play well with numpy, but I meant with lists.
So what we have to do is convert these inputs, this list of values from a Python list into a PyTorch
tensor.
So that's what I do here.
I'm just converting this list queue into a tensor and converting this list p also into a tensor okay
so p tensor.
And then this is q tensor like this.
Now this works but we get a value of 75, which seems a little strange because it's exactly the same.
I didn't run this code, but it's exactly the same as these numbers here where we got 1.3.
Now, the issue here is that PyTorch is or this binary cross entropy function is sensitive to the order
of the inputs.
And here.
This is a little confusing at first, but I think as we go throughout the course, as you learn more
about building models and working with binary cross entropy to evaluate model performance, I think
you will find that this becomes more intuitive.
Okay.
But so the point is we input q first and then p.
So p is the here this corresponds to the category labels.
You know is a cat or isn't a cat.
And Q here corresponds to the model predicted probability that the picture is a cat or isn't a cat.
And then we get the same answer that we got up here.
So in this video I introduced you to entropy information theoretic or Shannon entropy.
I showed you the formula how to interpret it.
And we discussed the application of entropy in deep learning.
Cross entropy is an important concept in deep learning.
And we are going to revisit this topic many times throughout this course.